Sylhet s?lh?t (Bengali ?????, ????????; historically Shilahatta; also Jalalabaad) is a major city that lies on the banks of Surma River in north-east Bangladesh. As of the 2011 census, the city has a population of 479,837.[1] It is surrounded by tea estates, sub-tropical hills, rain forests and river valleys; the region is one of the leading tourist destinations in the country. The city has one of the highest literacy rates in the country. Many Sylhetis live abroad, particularly in London of the UK, where they form a prominent community.
Sylhet is a prominent Islamic spiritual centre and home to numerous Sufi shrines. Sylhet has a reputation as the Spiritual Capital of Bangladesh.[5] also recognised as The Holy land of Bangladesh. It hosts the 14th century mausoleums of Shah Jalal and Shah Paran. The Sylhet municipality was constituted during the British Raj in 1867.[6] It was part of the Bengal Presidency and the Assam Province. Upon a referendum, it became part of East Bengal in the Pakistani Dominion after the Partition of British India in 1947. Sylhet became a focal point for Bengali revolutionaries during the Bangladesh Liberation War in 1971. It was the hometown of General M A G Osmani, the Commander-in-Chief of Bangladesh Forces.
The Sylhet Division produces most of Bangladesh's tea yield, fertiliser and natural gas.[7] It is also known for its cane, citrus, timber and agarwood.[8][9][10] Sylhet is a major recipient of remittances from the Bangladeshi diaspora, particularly from the United Kingdom. The city is served by the Osmani International Airport. It is connected to the Port of Chittagong by the N2 and the Bangladesh Railway. The Bangladesh-India border in Tamabil is located to the north of the city. Sylhet is also home to the Shahjalal University of Science and Technology. Sylhet has an international cricket stadium, Sylhet Agricultural University, Shahjalal Fertiliser Factory Ltd.Sylhet was an expanded commercial center from the ancient period, which explains its original namesake. During this time, "Sylhet" was inhabited by Indo-Aryan and Dravidian tribes though ethnically the population would also have traces of Assamese, Arabs, Persians, Chinese and Turks.[11] It has also been suggested that the capital cities of the ancie
t kingdoms of Harikela, Gaur, Srihatta and port city of Kamarupa were situated in modern-day Sylhet.[12][13]
In the ancient and early medieval period, Sylhet was ruled primarily by local chieftains as viceroy of the kings of Pragjyotishpur.[14] There is evidence to suggest that the Maharaja Sri Chandra, of northern Bengal, conquered Bengal in the 10th century, although this is a much disputed topic amongst Bangladeshi historians and archaeologists. This was a period of relative prosperity and there is little evidence to suggest this was marred by wars or feuds. Sylhet was certainly known by the rest of India, and is even referred to in the ancient Nath sacred Tantric text, the Shakti Sangama Tantra, as 'Silhatta'.[15] The last chieftain to reign in Sylhet was Govinda of Gaur.[16] Sylhet was previously a kingdom of Nath Shampraday, controlled by the rajas. Nath kingdoms of ancient Sylhet declined and tribal people of mongoloid origin established their chiefdoms in most parts of Sylhet. One of such chieftains was Gobindo of Gaur, commonly known as Gor Gobindo, who was defeated in 1303 by Hazrat Shah Jalal Yamani and his 360 Sufi disciples.